---
title: "Scaling the color and linetypes of your ggplots"
date: 2018-08-19
tags:[r, visualization]
excerpt: "Have you ever wondered how to change the linetype or color in a ggplot2 figure for a particular numeric column in your dataset? Then this blog is for you."
---

### Visualizing real-world data with categorical variables

ggplot2 is a great and easy way for visualizing real-world data with categorical variables as the following code chunk and figure show:

```R
library(ggplot2)
data(mtcars)

# Real-World Application with factor variable
mtcars %>%
  as_tibble() %>%
  ggplot(., aes(x = disp, y = mpg, color = factor(am)))+
  geom_point()
```

figure

However, when it comes to e.g. "synthetic" data (i.e. data obtained from a Monte Carlo simulation) where you want to change only the linetype or color of certain plotted numeric columns, ggplot2 can be a little bit hacky.

### Visualizing (numeric) simulation data

Suppose we have the following data:

```
x <- sort(rnorm(100))
y <- sin(x) + 0.2*rnorm(100)
z <- cos(x) + 0.2*rnorm(100)
```

Visualizing this data in one scatterplot where $y$ and $z$ have distinct colors is simple in base R and only requires two lines of code

```R
plot(x, y, col = 'blue')
points(x, z, col = 'red')
```

figure

### Using ggplot2 to plot numeric data adequately

Let's try to plot this simple figure in ggplot2 which generates friendlier figures. At first glance this seems to be an easy task for the ggplotters out there (and I encourage you to try it before reading on ;) ). However, note that in this dataset there is no factor variable indicating whether the $y$ or $z$ column shall be blue or red.

The easiest solution is given by the `scale_*_manual` functions.

```
df <- data.frame(x = x, y = y, z = z)

df %>%
  ggplot(.)+
  geom_point(aes(x = x, y = y, color = 'sin'))+
  geom_point(aes(x = x, y = z, color = 'cos'))+
  scale_color_manual(name = "Color-Mapping",
                     values = c('sin' = 'blue', 'cos' = 'red'))
```

Let's highlight some parts of this code. In the first `geom_point` layer we set `color = 'sin'`. Using the `scale_color_manual` function we can then map this color tag with the actual plotting color in the `values` argument of this function.

figure

The same logic applies for e.g. lineplots where you want to change the linetype of a specific variable. To do this, you can use the `scale_linetype_manual` using the same syntax (with minor modifications) as above.
